---
date: 2023-05-24
title: "Time-resolved small RNA transcriptomics of the ichthyosporean Sphaeroforma arctica"
permalink: /publications/F1000_2023
excerpt: "We sequenced the smallRNA content across the cell cycle of S. arctica"
header:
  teaser: assets/images/publications/2023_F1000.png
gallery:
  - url: assets/images/publications/2023_F1000.png
    image_path: assets/images/publications/2023_F1000.png
tags:
  - smallRNA
---

Ondracka, A., Dudin, O. and **Bråte, J**. 2023. *F1000Research*. [doi: https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.133935.1](https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.133935.1)

{% include gallery caption="" %}


<h3>Abstract</h3>  

Ichthyosporea, a clade of holozoans, represent a clade closely related to animals, and thus hold a key phylogenetic position for understanding the origin of animals. We have previously discovered that an ichthyosporean, *Sphaeroforma arctica*, contains microRNAs (miRNAs) as well as the miRNA processing machinery. This was the first discovery of miRNAs among the closest single-celled relatives of animals and raised intriguing questions about the roles of regulatory small RNAs in cell development and differentiation in unicellular eukaryotes. Like many ichthyosporeans, *S. arctica* also undergoes a transient multicellular developmental life cycle. As miRNAs are, among other roles, key regulators of gene expression during development in animals, we wanted to investigate the dynamics of miRNAs during the developmental cycle in S. arctica. Here we have therefore collected a comprehensive time-resolved small RNA transcriptome linked to specific life stages with a substantially higher sequencing depth than before, which can enable further discovery of functionally relevant small RNAs. The data consists of Illumina-sequenced small RNA libraries from two independent biological replicates of the entire life cycle of *S. arctica* with high temporal resolution. The dataset is directly linked and comes from the same samples as a previously published mRNA-seq dataset, thus enabling direct cross-functional analyses.

